Explorative data analysis (EDA) is a toolkit for deep data understanding required to formulate hypotheses for subsequent statistical procedures such as feature engineering and/or machine learning. Deep data understanding includes the iterative study of location, variability, and distribution of each random variable, the discovery of patterns and relationships between them, and the detection of outliers and anomalies. Graphical methods, such as histograms, box plots, density plots, heat maps, and/or scatter plots are harnessed to visualize and summarize the findings (Komorowski, Marshall, Salciccioli, and Crutain, 2016).
An experimental research methodology is used to study and visualize cause-and-effect relationships between random variables within Kaggle’s Titanic dataset. The dataset contains passenger traits such as survival, age, sex, or traveling class. The number of lifeboats were not sufficient to rescue everyone onboard leading to a “natural” selection process potentially encoded within the data. The EDA explores how passenger attributes are spread, distributed, and related, revealing interesting aspects about survival.
First, the feature space was cleaned and transformed, and missing values were imputed if applicable. Then, descriptive statistics were applied on selected random variables prior identifying patterns, studying relationships, and generating visual insights. Due to space limitations, only a few random variables were visualized and discussed in depth. Likewise, the extensive feature engineering potential of the dataset was not fully explored.
